


                     Particle Physics Major Option
                     -----------------------------

                          Michaelmas 2005


Lecture 1:  Introduction, Klein-Gordon, Dirac up to end of 2.3

Lecture 2:  Continue with Dirac equation, up to end of 2.7
              (skimmed over Dirac sea and discovery of positron.)
              (bit rushed near the end.)

Lecture 3:  Finished Dirac eqn (antiparticles and chirality);
            then Dirac delta func and transition rates, up to middle of 3.2.
              (only had a few minutes available for the non-examinable stuff
               at the end of handout 2).
              (didn't show any of the powerpoint stuff on helicity/chirality/g-2).

Lecture 4:  Finished handout 3 (decay rates and cross sections).
              (laptop disaster - wouldn't talk to projector)

Lecture 5:  QED Feynman rules, and e+e- --> mu+mu-.

Lecture 6:  e-mu- scattering by crossing.  Then e-p scattering and form factors
            up to Rosenbluth formula and interpretation of GE and GM as FTs.

Lecture 7:  Finished proton and neutron form factors.  Then DIS (kinematics,
            Bjorken scaling, Callan-Gross) up to start of parton model.

Lecture 8:  Parton model, scaling violations, HERA.  Slightly rushed.

Lecture 9:  Finished DIS (Higgs at LHC).  Then symmetries and isospin up to Pauli matrices.

Lecture 10: Finished SU(2). Then SU(3) flavour. Then SU(3) colour up to colour confinement.

Lecture 11: Hadrons, QCD Feynman rules, colour forces (handout 6), hadron-hadron scattering.
            First two transparencies on colour potentials.

Lecture 12: Long-range QCD potential, running couplings, P and C.
            Then parity violation up to V-A Feynman rule.

Lecture 13: Consequences of, and evidence for, V-A (skipped Goldhaber).  Then neutrino
            scattering, up to DIS and start of parton model (just began 7.6).

Lecture 14: Finished neutrino DIS (didn't bother going through handout 7.7 Appendix).
            Then neutral kaons up to but not including strangeness oscillations. 

Lecture 15: Strangeness oscillations, discovery of CP violation, pipi decays, semileptonic
            charge asymmetry. Ended with aliens, but skipping till next lecture the algebra
            in handout 8.6.

Lecture 16: Finished CP violation in neutral kaons.  Then CKM up to measurement of first two rows.

Lecture 17: Finished CKM, then unitarity triangle and sin(2beta).  Went through all the
            powerpoint slides first, and then outlined handout 8.8-8.12 until time ran out.

Lecture 18: QED, gauge theories (skipping handout 9), electroweak unification,
            then W decay (handout 10).

Lecture 19: Z decay and Higgs boson "theory". "How to build a SM". Then Z resonance theory
            up to handout 11.2.3

Lecture 20: Finished handout 11.  Then precision electroweak tests. Skipped Higgs search at LEP.
             (skipped rapidly through the LEP2 plots to catch up time)
            Then Reines+Cowan experiment.

Lecture 21: Discovery of nu-mu. Solar neutrinos, including handout 12.1, up to but not including MSW

Lecture 22: Last 2-3 slides of solar neutrinos.
            Then reactor and atmospheric neutrino expts (interspersed with coupled pendulum demo).
             [gave them 5 minutes at start to fill in questionnaires].

Lecture 23: PMNS matrix and neutrino masses, but only skimming quickly through handout 12.2.
            Then GUTS, up to hierarchy problem.

Lecture 24: Finished GUTS.  Then SUSY, LHC, baryogenesis. 





